[music]
>> Pushkin.
Previously on Revisionist [music]
History.
I think there was a pressure to have a
method that looked more humane than
electric heat and lethal gas.
On that van and I go back [music] to the
hotel where the other people had been in
there praying with his family and I have
to go in and tell them, you know, John's
gone. It was peaceful. He didn't appear
to suffer.
This is how lethal injection actually
kills you. It kills you by burning your
lungs out and you're also paralyzed so
you can't complain that this is
happening.
Good afternoon, everybody. Thank you for
being here. Hope everybody had a
wonderful holiday if I haven't seen you
since then.
Call this press conference today because
I believe the people of Alabama deserve
an explanation on where things stand and
where I stand with regard to capital
punishment in our state.
It's early December 2022, Montgomery,
Alabama. Steve Marshall, the state's
attorney general, is holding a press
conference standing at the podium
flanked by the Alabama and American
flags. What occurred on November 17th
was a travesty.
But not for the reasons that many death
penalty opponents and death row
sympathizers [music]
would have the public to believe.
My name is Malcolm Gladwell. You're
listening to the Alabama murders, our
series on the Elizabeth [music] Sennett
case.
This is episode five, cruel and unusual.
It's about the second of her assailants,
Kenny Smith, and what was done to him in
the name of justice.
>> [music]
>> The travesty of November 17th.
>> Kenny Smith was 22 at the time of
Elizabeth Sennett's murder.
He had a girlfriend and two young
children. He was working in a factory.
He was slight, skinny, dark hair,
thick moon-shaped eyebrows. He was drunk
a lot and high,
but always smiling.
They would come over to my house a lot
and he knew it he'd just be grinning
because and Michael would be sitting in
the backseat
in his car seat and
but Kenny would be high and he you know,
he would be drinking.
This is Linda Smith, Kenny's mom,
talking with a local reporter named Lee
Hedgepeth.
Lee has covered the Kenny Smith case and
knows his family well.
What kind of drunk was Kenny?
He was a happy drunk.
Yeah.
It's hard to think of think of Kenny as
anything but happy
>> I know. Yeah.
Um I mean, what you're saying is what
what you get with him.
On the evening after the attack on
Elizabeth Sennett, Smith's best friend
came over to his house. They went out to
get beer.
Kenny's hand was swollen. He had it
wrapped in a bandage.
On the way to the store, Kenny kept
saying, "I messed up. I messed up." He
wouldn't say why. Then back at home, he
started crying.
His mother lived close by.
In the days that followed before the
police caught up to him, he went to see
her.
And Kenny, you know, like I said, he
would come over
uh during that time. I mean, I look back
on the times that he would come over and
uh he would be kind of distant, you
know.
And he would just
I mean, it's just like it was something
he wanted to tell me, but
he never you know, he never did.
So, when do you find out that he's
implicated in some way?
Um well, I
found out one afternoon when he calls
me.
Um I think he just got home from work
and uh
he called me and he said um
"Mom, can you come pick up Michael?" And
I said, "Well, I'm washing my hair right
now. I said I can't right this minute."
And he said,
"Well, Mom, can you come?" He said, "The
police are here."
And I just thought it was, you know, for
pot or drugs or something like that.
And I said, "Well, you know, I'll be
over there you know, in just a minute."
Of course, it didn't take me long to get
to their house.
And when I drove up over there in that
driveway, I bet you there was 10 10 cars
out in front.
Kenny Smith met the same fate as his
friend John Parker, who you heard about
in the last episode.
Smith was charged with murder,
convicted, sentenced by the jury to life
without parole by a vote of 11 to 1,
and then his judge did the same thing
John Parker's judge did, overrode the
jury's decision and sentenced him to
death.
He got sent to Holman prison and stayed
there for decades appealing his
sentence, delaying the inevitable until
November 17th, 2022,
when the event that the attorney general
of the state of Alabama called a
travesty happened.
It's been a great deal of media coverage
both local and national
about what happened in Kenny Smith's
execution chamber.
Much of that coverage has seemingly been
openly sympathetic to Smith and his
cause
even with some going so far as to
advocate for the abolishment of the
death penalty.
And on what basis exactly?
Because a cold-blooded convicted killer
complains about the prodding and poking
of the small IV line.
Really?
Prodding and poking with a needle?
Prodding and poking with a needle.
Let's start there.
The state of Alabama has a detailed set
of instructions for how executions are
to be carried out in their prisons,
a protocol.
The protocol was not supposed to be a
public document, but Alabama was forced
to disclose it during a death penalty
court case. It's 41 pages of dry,
precise language stipulating every step
of the process.
When a condemned prisoner is supposed to
be moved to a special holding cell, when
he gets his last meal, what he gets to
have in his cell, the people who are
allowed to attend the execution, where
the victim's family goes, where the
offender's group goes, things like that.
>> [music]
>> The execution team is made up of about a
dozen people. It has a captain.
The team is supposed to do a
walk-through in the week leading up to
the execution, batting practice if you
will, to make sure they have the killing
procedure down pat.
As you may remember from the last
episode, the seed of the idea behind
lethal injection came from Ronald
Reagan, who said, "Why don't we just
execute people the same way we put down
horses?"
To use the veterinarian's euphemism,
>> [music]
>> put them to sleep, clean, quick,
professional, something that appears
painless instead of all the messiness of
the electric chair. That's very much the
spirit of the Alabama protocol.
What was so, I think, um
effective about lethal injection and
sinister
>> [snorts]
>> is the fact that when you observe an
execution with lethal injection
generally,
it's a pretty bloodless event. Not much
happens. It appears that a person kind
of closes their eyes, maybe you could
imagine that they fall asleep, and then
they're dead.
Joe Zevit, the intensive care specialist
from Emory University in Atlanta, who
fell into death penalty work a few years
ago.
So, this was a breakthrough in terms of
the witness experience because every
other kind of execution method that had
ever occurred before then, you know, was
quite a lot more graphic.
Uh but lethal injection seemed to, you
know, solve the problem of being
outwardly peaceful.
And and that's why I think lethal
injection took hold and on top of that,
of course, there was this kind of uh
impersonation of a medical act. There
was the use of terminology of medicine
and even the use of physicians and other
medical people, which gave this kind of
extra impression, you know, that this
was legitimate
and endorsed kind of activity.
Which brings us to the portion of the
protocol at issue on the evening of
November 17th, 2022.
It's in section B, part 1, clause A.
Quote, "The IV team will be escorted
into the execution chamber to start the
IV. The heart monitor leads will be
applied to the condemned inmate. If the
condemned inmate's veins make obtaining
venous access difficult or problematic,
>> [music]
>> qualified medical personnel may perform
a central line procedure as set forth in
section 2 of appendix B,
ADOC lethal injection execution
procedure."
A central line procedure involves
inserting a long, thin, flexible tube
into a large vein, like the jugular vein
in the neck or the subclavian vein in
the chest or the femoral vein in the
thigh. So, you try for the arm, the
normal way, and if you fail,
you go for a big vein. That's the plan.
Only in real life things aren't always
so straightforward as outlined in
section B, part 1, clause A.
In the case of Kenny Smith and in other
cases, there have been these initial
problems in finding a vein. Yeah, I want
to talk about this with you, Michael.
>> about this cuz I as a a non-medical
person
I'm I'm puzzled. I don't understand
this. Um
>> Sure. Yeah. So, yeah, walk me through
why why is that hard? Alabama, you know,
was the poster child of failure
for this in a in an odd kind of cluster
of cases. And and
to ask your question directly, why is it
hard? Well, it's hard because in order
to put an intravenous into a vein, you
know, it requires a certain, you know,
level of skill and it also requires some
cooperation.
You know, uh it hurts to stick someone
with a needle. So, in someone who is
sort of young and fit and well uh and
well hydrated and relaxed, um you know,
that the chance of getting a vein in a
person like that is quite high, you
know? Uh in someone who's
who's dehydrated, terrified, uh had been
sick, had been in prison for two
decades, you know, it becomes a lot
harder. Plus, you're also giving it over
to people who are not expert. Okay? You
know, an anesthesiologist in good
standing is not going to spend their
Wednesdays over at the, you know, state
corrections sticking IVs in people for
execution. It's not something that we
do.
And people who, you know, to learn to do
an intravenous is a technical skill and
it can be learned. Um
but I think also the people who are
doing it themselves are nervous.
Alabama won't reveal exactly who is on
the execution team, what their training
is, how much experience they have, but
it's safe to say this isn't a team full
of doctors since doctors have to take an
oath to do no harm and hooking someone
up to an IV that will transport lethal
drugs is definitely doing harm. That's
Zivot's point.
These are prison employees or outside
contractors. It's not the
anesthesiologist from the nearest
teaching hospital.
You know, there are some ways of making
it more likely than not to succeed, but
you know, what is taught either in
nursing school or as an EMT or as a
doctor cannot be lifted into the death
chamber. Like it's not the same place.
If these people are not patients, you
know, they're not collaborators to you.
In some states with the death penalty,
putting in the IV is done in full view
of the witnesses to the execution.
But in Alabama, it's done before the
witnesses are invited into the execution
chamber.
Which means that any outsider who is
there to see the execution, the families
and friends and reporters, are forced
[music] to guess how the IV process is
going.
The executions are supposed to start at
6:00. The witnesses [music]
are all sequestered in a holding room
away from the execution site.
And if it gets to be 7:00 p.m. or 7:30
or 9:00 p.m. [music] and the witnesses
haven't yet been picked up by the bus to
go take them to the execution chamber,
then everyone starts to wonder,
is there a problem?
This is exactly what happened in the
summer of 2022 while Kenny Smith was
still appealing his sentence.
A condemned inmate at Holman named Joe
Nathan James was set to be executed.
Everything with James ran late.
Afterwards, the state insisted the
procedure had gone according to plan,
but Zivot was suspicious.
He asked to perform a second autopsy.
And what he found was, in a word,
gruesome.
Consider yourself warned.
I was able to get his body
uh and I worked with a pathologist in
Alabama and and went there. And with
him, you know, we performed this second
autopsy uh and I saw in his body um
evidence of, you know, multiple attempts
at intravenouses. And some of these
things, you know, you could see
bruising, which meant that they were,
you know, kind of getting in and getting
out of a vein and there was some
bleeding under the skin and there was
These were both on, you know, on
multiple spots on his arms, up and down
both arms. And then, there was also
evidence of something called a cutdown.
And a cutdown is where you take a knife
to the skin and you open the skin to
reveal, you know, a vein
beneath that that you couldn't otherwise
see or feel.
Um it's kind of an old-style technique
and it's been replaced by ultrasound um
and the protocol uh at the time does not
provide for the possibility of a
cutdown.
And also the cutdown along the edges of
it uh had blood, which again meant that
he had to have been alive and bleeding
for this to have taken place.
And so, somehow they got some IV in him,
but it took them hours to do it. So,
picture, you know, Joe Nathan James
lying there, strapped down, you know,
not cooperative, as they poke and poke
and poke him and they finally just take
a knife to his forearm to open up his
forearm to try to get a vein there.
Um and that that so that was Joe.
Then came Alan Miller two months later.
Under Alabama law, once a defendant has
been convicted of a capital crime, he or
she is given a death warrant. A warrant
is a writ issued by the court, which
lays out the facts of the conviction,
the specific offense, the judgment of
the court, and [music] the time and
place of execution, which in Alabama is
a purpose-built facility on the campus
of Holman prison in Atmore.
At the time, once a date had been set,
the execution had to take place by
midnight.
So, they started at 6:00 p.m. and gave
themselves 6 hours.
>> [music]
>> With Alan Miller, they ran out of time,
gave up.
The state had to come back and kill him
on another day.
Then
>> [music]
>> came Kenny Smith.
Tell me your impressions of Kenny. What
was he like?
Kenny, I I obviously didn't know him
when
he was a 22-year-old
person at the time of the events for
which he was convicted, but
he truly
was an example and I know this is going
to sound trite and a cliché, um
but he
really
got religion
figuratively and literally. You know, in
prison, he was a
force for good.
This is Robert Grass, one of Kenny
Smith's lawyers, the one who had been
with him the longest. He's a litigator
for a prestigious corporate law firm in
New York City. He represents
pharmaceutical companies,
but he does pro bono death penalty work
on the side. He started representing
Kenny Smith in 2005.
How many How many times over the course
of 20 years did you go to Alabama?
I don't have an exact number, but
many.
Holman prison, where Smith was held, is
in the southern part of the state.
Grass was in New York, so that's New
York to Atlanta, Atlanta to Mobile, rent
a car in Mobile, drive an hour to
Atmore.
He made that journey for close to two
decades.
I really felt as if
we developed a friendship. You know, I
really would have
like to have had the opportunity to
interact with him under different
circumstances.
Grass is older, lean, dark suit, gray
hair, Ivy League degree, [__] laude law
school graduate. He probably bills out
at some astronomical number.
Whenever I read about some complicated
legal negotiation that goes on into the
wee hours of the morning, I imagine it's
because someone like Robert Grass is
involved.
As measured and dispassionate and
implacable at 3:00 a.m. as they were at
3:00 in the afternoon.
You have to listen very closely when he
talks. He doesn't broadcast his
feelings. He sends out Morse code
signals.
Talk a little bit more about
your friendship. It's It's an un- It's
an unlikely friendship.
Yeah.
I do you know, we obviously um
grew up in uh uh
different circumstances.
Different circumstances.
Morse code.
I've had other experiences with some
folks on death row where I
you know, didn't feel the same bond.
Um but Kenny, as I said, by the time I
knew him,
um
was
just a decent man,
incredibly
gracious,
and really seemed to have
the best he could, given the uh
environment he was in, to have been
leading a productive life
in that environment.
In the fall of 2022, Smith and his legal
team suffered a serious setback.
Smith was finally given a death warrant
and the warrant set the date of the
execution.
November 17th, 2022.
But those two botched execution cases,
Alan Miller and Joe Nathan James, gave
Grass one more chance.
The Supreme Court has long supported the
idea that states can execute prisoners
if they wish.
But they have insisted that executions
have to be done the right way.
And what happened to Joe Nathan James
and Alan Miller didn't seem like it fit
any definition of the right way.
So Smith's lawyers sued. The way Alabama
is practicing lethal injection is cruel
and unusual punishment.
The case was dismissed. Grass appealed
to the 11th Circuit in Atlanta.
Arguments were heard on November 16th,
the day before Smith's death warrant.
Grass went directly from the hearing
to the prison.
Then I went to Holman, which is where
Holman is. Visited with Kenny that
morning. We were still waiting for the
11th Circuit's decision. [snorts]
And that day became a real
uh roller coaster of emotions.
Grass was in a hotel room a mile or two
from the prison.
At 8:00 p.m., Grass heard that the
prison guards at Holman had taken Kenny
out of his cell and were preparing him
for execution.
But that wasn't right. His appeal was
still up in the air.
Then Grass got another call. The 11th
Circuit had ruled in Kenny's favor. The
execution was off.
At which point the state of Alabama
appealed to the US Supreme Court.
It was now after 8:00 p.m.
And in the meantime, I'm kind of
watching the clock tick because the
death warrant expired at midnight. So,
I'm
hoping to reach that point without this
going forward. But at about uh
quarter after 10:00 or so,
um
got a call from the emergency clerk at
the United States Supreme Court,
sometimes referred to as the death
clerk, because a lot of the emergencies
involve capital cases, but
who said um
"There's no easy way to say this." And
so I
knew from that
preparatory remark what was coming.
The Supreme Court ruled in favor of
Alabama.
One of the reporters who was at Holman
prison covering the story emailed Grass
to say they were moving the witnesses to
the death chamber.
Grass sat in his hotel room
waiting to hear what happened.
Nothing.
Silence.
The next morning, he learned why.
So,
he was taken out of the cell
um
thinking that his execution was
imminent,
strapped to a gurney,
and nothing is happening, and he's
asking, you know, the corrections
officers who are with them, "What's
going on?" And they,
you know,
tell him
they don't know. Um
And then when they finally got going,
you know, they've got three members of
an IV team,
um none of whom are identified to him.
There are other people in the execution
chamber with them that were not
identified to him.
They're, you know, jabbing him with a
needle trying to find a vein, which
um
they weren't
able to do.
Then they tried something called a
central line procedure to kind of
stick a needle under his collarbone and
reach one of his central veins, but
again, they didn't tell him
what they were doing, what was going on.
They just kind of put a surgical gown
over him, you know, one of the IV team
members came
back into the room in surgical garb, and
you know, Kenny is
asking these people what's you know,
what they're doing. No one is telling
them.
I'm going to read from a report on that
evening commissioned by Grass and his
team. It includes a very detailed
description of what Kenny said happened
to him in the execution chamber.
He recalled seeing a clear plastic sheet
over his chest with an open center.
He saw that the man had a syringe in his
hand, and he unbuttoned Mr. Smith's
shirt and injected a yellow liquid into
his chest. The man said, "You will feel
something cool."
And the man slid a long needle into his
chest.
He inserted the needle, and as Kenny
perceived it, moved the needle around
while it was inserted in his chest.
Mr. Smith noted that he  lost all
composure  at this point,
describing
everything became surreal. Everything
went out the window.
Mr. Smith became terrified that he was
being injected with a substance that
would render him unable to communicate,
something that he knew would violate an
existing court order.
He was again panicked that he would not
be able to say his final words to his
family and the victim's family, given
what he heard had happened in a previous
execution.
The man who had been injecting him in
the chest and the IV team all stepped
back.
Mr. Smith tried to gather himself and
then said that they stepped back up, and
the man from behind his shoulder had a
large gauge needle with a large
cylinder.
Mr. Smith said he  freaked out
demanding that someone call
his lawyer.
Next, Deputy Warden Woods put his hands
on Mr. Smith on both sides of his head
and said,
"This is for your own good."
pulling his head to the side.
Mr. Smith then recalled searing pain
as he was injected under his collarbone.
He said,
"It took my breath away."
And he recalled that he was [music]
gasping and trying to get away by
bucking up off the table.
Mr. Smith recounted that he believed the
man tried approximately five times to
get this large needle into a vein under
his collarbone.
By the time
this was done, that after 3 and 1/2 or 4
hours being strapped to a gurney, um
you know, he was unable to
uh
stand, walk,
unbutton his shirt,
you know, change his clothes, do any of
that without
assistance.
It was now almost midnight.
Kenny couldn't stand. He asked for a
wheelchair. They refused.
He sat outside the chamber until the
guards picked him up by the arms and
carried him to the infirmary.
I can't help but think about the
execution team [music] in this moment,
assuming they'd be able to carry out the
most overwhelming of tasks on the
pretense
that it's a clean, professional, humane
exercise,
only to suddenly realize they can't do
it.
They're over their heads, and they can't
hide. They're stuck in the execution
chamber until midnight. [music]
For reasons I can't fully explain, every
time I think of the night of November
17th, I think of the lines from an old
Graham Parker song.
The doctor gets nervous completing the
service. He's all rubber gloves and no
head.
He fumbles the light switch. It's just
another minor hitch.
Wishes to God he was dead.
After a night like that,
how could you not wish to God you were
dead?
>> [music]
>> Kenny Smith's failed execution was on a
Thursday.
The following Monday, the governor of
Alabama, Kay Ivey, paused all pending
executions in the state and ordered a
top-to-bottom review of the state's
capital punishment protocol.
And then,
2 and 1/2 weeks after that, came Steve
Marshall's press conference.
Good afternoon, everybody.
Called this press conference today
because of Attorney General's office,
Montgomery, Alabama.
Flags on both sides of the podium.
Alabama's highest-ranking legal officer
seeks to set the record straight.
And what was on his mind?
That 6-hour window that Holman prison
had given itself
to get someone ready to be executed.
Why were they starting so late in the
day?
It was letting murderers and their
lawyers game the system.
So, if you're a defense lawyer
representing an inmate, you simply know
that you have to push the clock back as
far as possible. I think we saw that
occur with the last two executions. No
fault Not to mention the prisoners
themselves, they weren't helping
matters. But let's also acknowledge
that inmates themselves have
responsibility here, not just in the
delay that's occurred, but I think
you've seen in pleadings that that we
have where inmates are resisting the
efforts to put that IV line in, which
obviously makes it more difficult.
Can you believe it? The condemned
prisoners are not cooperating with their
executioners.
A reporter raises his hand.
Is there anything the state legislature
could do? Like maybe adding another
method of execution or increasing that
window to 48 or 72 hours?
Yes, yes, Marshall says. That is the
issue here. We just don't have long
enough. And although we have a 24-hour
period right now, we're really in
actuality have a 6-hour window based
upon policies the Department of
Corrections having in place long before
the current commissioner, long before
Governor Ivey or myself.
And I'm sure that's one of the things
that they will look at as part of their
review.
I'm sure that's one of the things they
will look at as part of their review.
And sure enough,
it was.
The governor's top-to-bottom review
turned out to be a new rule that said
the guards at Holman prison would have
until the following morning to complete
their service. Six more hours to poke
and prod and take a knife and peel back
flesh and dig around the collarbone and
manage the rising sense of shame and
self-loathing and revulsion that comes
to being asked to do a job without
really knowing how to do a job.
It's been a great deal of media
coverage, both local and national,
about what happened in Kenny Smith's
execution chamber.
Much of that coverage has seemingly been
openly sympathetic to Smith and his
cause,
even with some going so far as to
advocate for the abolishment of the
death penalty.
>> [music]
>> And on what basis exactly?
Because a cold-blooded convicted killer
complains about the prodding [music] and
poking
of a small IV line.
Really?
Prodding and poking with a needle?
As the moral failure cascade gains
momentum, indifference
turns to cruelty.
And through all of this,
Kenny Smith was back in his cell,
still alive.
>> [music]
>> What do you do after the state has tried
to kill you and failed?
If the state botches the attempt the
first time around, does that disqualify
them from trying again?
Robert Grass and the rest of Kenny
Smith's legal team realized they needed
someone to do an assessment of Kenny's
condition before they could do anything
else.
They needed someone who knew what it
might be like to be strapped to a gurney
for 3 and 1/2 hours while a group of
people in surgical garb stabbed them
with needles. [music]
So, they called Kate Porterfield.
>> [music]
>> Coming up on Revisionist History,
one of the people on the team who he
didn't know
says to him, "It's over, and I'll be
praying for you."
So, these kinds of moments for Kenny
were just unmanageable [music]
afterwards. They were unmanageable
moments with other humans.
I guess it started after Kenny [music]
was born.
What I think is he
was doing stuff and
he was thinking I was, you know?
>> [music]
>> Right. He was jealous. Yeah, and but I
wasn't, you know?
I had a kid to raise.
He
really
kind of got me. He made me really pause
and think a lot, Kenny Smith, because
watching someone only start from a place
of love after something so horrible was
I had never seen that before.
>> [music]
>> Revisionist History is produced by Lucy
Sullivan, Ben de la F Hafee, and Nina
Bird Lawrence. Additional reporting by
Ben de la F Hafee and Lee Hedgepeth. Our
editor is Karen Shakhurji. Fact checking
by Kate Furby.
>> [music]
>> Our executive producer is Jacob Smith.
Engineering by Nina Bird Lawrence.
Production support from Louie Lemaire.
Original scoring by Luis Guerra [music]
with Paul Brainard and Jimmy Bot.
Sound design and additional [music]
music by Jake Gorsky.
I'm Malcolm Gladwell.
>> [music]
[music]
>> You can get this entire season now
ad-free by subscribing to Revisionist
History on Pushkin Plus.
Sign up on the show page on Apple
Podcasts or at pushkin.fm/plus.
Pushkin Plus subscribers can access
ad-free episodes, full audiobooks,
exclusive binges, and bonus content for
all Pushkin shows.